---
title: Getting Started
description: Deploy the GitHub Actions Cache Server using Docker and use it with self-hosted runners
---

The cache server comes as a Docker image and can be deployed using Docker Compose or Kubernetes.

## 1. Deploying the Cache Server

```yaml [docker-compose.yml]
version: '3.9'

services:
  cache-server:
    image: ghcr.io/falcondev-oss/github-actions-cache-server:latest
    ports:
      - '3000:3000'
    environment:
      URL_ACCESS_TOKEN: random_token
      API_BASE_URL: http://localhost:3000
    volumes:
      - cache-data:/app/.data

volumes:
  cache-data:
```

### Environment Variables

#### `URL_ACCESS_TOKEN`

This token is used to authenticate runtime requests to the cache server. It should be a long random string. It is part of the URL used to access the cache server because we cannot use cookies or headers for authentication.

#### `API_BASE_URL`

- Example: `http://localhost:3000`

The base URL of your cache server. This needs to be accessible by your runners as it is used for making API requests and downloading cached files.

#### `STORAGE_DRIVER`

- Default: `filesystem`

The storage driver to use for storing cache data. For more information, see [Storage Drivers](/getting-started/storage-drivers).

#### `DB_DRIVER`

- Default `sqlite`

The database driver to use for storing cache metadata. For more information, see [Database Drivers](/getting-started/database-drivers).

#### `ENABLE_DIRECT_DOWNLOADS`

- Default: `false`

If set to `true`, will send a signed URL to the runner. The runner can then download the cache directly from the storage provider. This is useful if you have a large cache and don't want to proxy the download through the cache server.

::u-alert
---
icon: 'tabler:alert-triangle'
class: ring-amber-400
color: amber
description: The actions runner needs to be able to reach the storage provider directly to use direct downloads.
variant: subtle
---
::

#### `CLEANUP_OLDER_THAN_DAYS`

- Default: `90`

The number of days to keep stale cache data and metadata before deleting it. Set to `0` to disable cache cleanup.

#### `NITRO_PORT`

- Default: `3000`

The port the server should listen on.

#### `ENABLE_TYPED_KEY_PREFIX_REMOVAL`

- Default: `false`

If enabled then any specifically structured keys will be automatically removed if there are more keys of such type than 
the amount specified via `MAX_STORED_KEYS_PER_TYPE`.
Key type is defined by the following format:
`{key_type}{TYPED_KEY_DELIMITER}{optional custom string}`

Usually, it's recommended to use the following key structure:
`{repository_name}_{branch}_{unique_key_name}{TYPED_KEY_DELIMITER}{hash or other unique data}`

An example could look like:
`falcondev-oss/github-actions-cache-server_dev_docker-cache@#@16ee33c5f9f59c0`

In such case older keys with prefix `falcondev-oss/github-actions-cache-server_dev_docker-cache` will be automatically 
removed whenever there are more records for this key type then the one specified via `MAX_STORED_KEYS_PER_TYPE`.

#### `MAX_STORED_KEYS_PER_TYPE`

- Default: `3`

If `ENABLE_TYPED_KEY_PREFIX_REMOVAL` is `true` then this is the maximum amount of the most recent keys to keep per key type. 
Any other older keys will be automatically removed.

#### `TYPED_KEY_DELIMITER`

- Default: `@#@`

If `ENABLE_TYPED_KEY_PREFIX_REMOVAL` is `true` then this is the delimiter which is used to identify the key type. 
Any prefix before `@#@` is considered to be the key type.

## 2. Setup with Self-Hosted Runners

To leverage the GitHub Actions Cache Server with your self-hosted runners, you'll need to configure a couple of environment variables on your runners. This ensures that your runners can authenticate with and utilize the cache server effectively.

### Configuring Environment Variables on Self-Hosted Runners

**`ACTIONS_CACHE_URL`**: This tells your self-hosted runner where to send cache requests. Set this environment variable to the `API_BASE_URL` of your cache server with the `URL_ACCESS_TOKEN` as first path parameter, making sure to include a trailing slash.

For example, if your cache server's `API_BASE_URL` is `http://localhost:3000` and your `URL_ACCESS_TOKEN` is `random_token`, you would set `ACTIONS_CACHE_URL` to `http://localhost:3000/random_token/`.

::u-alert
---
icon: 'tabler:alert-triangle'
class: ring-amber-400
color: amber
description: Make sure to add a trailing slash to the ACTIONS_CACHE_URL environment variable.
variant: subtle
---
::

### Getting the Actions Runner to Use the Cache Server

The default self-hosted runner overwrites the `ACTIONS_CACHE_URL` environment variable with the GitHub-hosted cache server URL. To get the runner to use your self-hosted cache server, you'll need to modify the runner binary:

#### Docker

Just add the following lines to your Dockerfile:

```dockerfile [Dockerfile]
FROM ghcr.io/actions/actions-runner:latest

# modify actions runner binaries to allow custom cache server implementation
RUN sed -i 's/\x41\x00\x43\x00\x54\x00\x49\x00\x4F\x00\x4E\x00\x53\x00\x5F\x00\x43\x00\x41\x00\x43\x00\x48\x00\x45\x00\x5F\x00\x55\x00\x52\x00\x4C\x00/\x41\x00\x43\x00\x54\x00\x49\x00\x4F\x00\x4E\x00\x53\x00\x5F\x00\x43\x00\x41\x00\x43\x00\x48\x00\x45\x00\x5F\x00\x4F\x00\x52\x00\x4C\x00/g' /home/runner/bin/Runner.Worker.dll
```

#### Bare Metal

::code-group

```bash [Linux]
sed -i 's/\x41\x00\x43\x00\x54\x00\x49\x00\x4F\x00\x4E\x00\x53\x00\x5F\x00\x43\x00\x41\x00\x43\x00\x48\x00\x45\x00\x5F\x00\x55\x00\x52\x00\x4C\x00/\x41\x00\x43\x00\x54\x00\x49\x00\x4F\x00\x4E\x00\x53\x00\x5F\x00\x43\x00\x41\x00\x43\x00\x48\x00\x45\x00\x5F\x00\x4F\x00\x52\x00\x4C\x00/g' /path_to_your_runner/bin/Runner.Worker.dll
```

```bash [MacOS]
gsed -i 's/\x41\x00\x43\x00\x54\x00\x49\x00\x4F\x00\x4E\x00\x53\x00\x5F\x00\x43\x00\x41\x00\x43\x00\x48\x00\x45\x00\x5F\x00\x55\x00\x52\x00\x4C\x00/\x41\x00\x43\x00\x54\x00\x49\x00\x4F\x00\x4E\x00\x53\x00\x5F\x00\x43\x00\x41\x00\x43\x00\x48\x00\x45\x00\x5F\x00\x4F\x00\x52\x00\x4C\x00/g' /path_to_your_runner/bin/Runner.Worker.dll
```

```bash [Windows]
[byte[]] -split (((Get-Content -Path ./bin/Runner.Worker.dll -Encoding Byte) | ForEach-Object ToString X2) -join '' -Replace '41004300540049004F004E0053005F00430041004300480045005F00550052004C00','41004300540049004F004E0053005F00430041004300480045005F004F0052004C00' -Replace '..', '0x$& ') | Set-Content -Path /path_to_your_runner/bin/Runner.Worker.dll -Encoding Byte
```

::

This will replace the strings `ACTIONS_CACHE_URL` with `ACTIONS_CACHE_ORL` in the runner binary. This will prevent the runner from overwriting the `ACTIONS_CACHE_URL` environment variable and allow it to use your self-hosted cache server.

Doing it this way is a bit of a hack, but it's easier than compiling your own runner binary from source and works great.

## 3. Using the Cache Server

There is no need to change any of your workflows! 🔥

If you've set up your self-hosted runners correctly, they will automatically use the cache server for caching.

## 4. Cache cleanup

Cache cleanup can be triggered automatically via configured eviction policies like:
- `CLEANUP_OLDER_THAN_DAYS` - eviction by time.
- `ENABLE_TYPED_KEY_PREFIX_REMOVAL` - eviction by key type (key prefix).

Moreover, an additional API exists which can be used to evict key records by using specified key prefix.
API path: `/<token>/extra/clear_key_prefix`. API method: `POST`.
Request body: `{ keyPrefix: string }`.

Any keys with the prefix of `keyPrefix` will be removed and data will be cleared for such keys.
Usually, it's useful to call keys removal for an archived branch or a closed PR where you know that the cache won't 
be reused anymore. For such cases you could have a step which is called and clears all keys prefixed with the branch name. 
For example: 
```
- name: Remove keys by prefix
  run: curl --header "Content-Type: application/json" --request POST --data '{"keyPrefix":"${{ github.head_ref || github.ref_name }}"}' "${ACTIONS_CACHE_URL}extra/clear_key_prefix"
```
